README.md, before:

# MATLAB LaMSA Model

LaMSA model implemented in MATLAB. 

**Open app/plot_app.mlapp in MATLAB for a graphical user interface to run the model.**


## Code details

get_metrics.m is a helper function to extract kinematic metrics (e.g. vmax, amax) from the solution (t,x,v)


Code to numerically integrate LaMSA model is primarily in function solve_model.m

Helper functions to solve_model.m:
launching_ode.m
launching_end.m
unlatching_ode.
unlatching_end.m
writeInfoToFile.m
/components-library


Message from Andres Cook:

Congratulations, LaMSA person! You’ve volunteered for the coolest PoSM lab project. Of course, you’re probably just here because something stopped working, which is probably because of something I did, so…. Oops. Hopefully this documentation will at least be a good starting point, but if not, flag down Prof. Ilton and/or email me at acook@hmc.edu (or Facebook message me tbh)

-Andres Cook ‘21

P.S. from Jackson Castro:

We've added some new features! As well as a ton of more ouputs to sol, we have also incorporated friction and reorganized a lot of stuff in the new /components-library. Further updates to this directory will allow for even easier calls to different types of system setups. As of this moment in time, the simulation seems to be working pretty well, but if for some reason something is giving an odd output, feel free to contact me at jcastro@g.hmc.edu or on Facebook messenger. Best of luck with the simulations!

-Jackson Castro '22

P.P.S from Kaanthi Pandhigunta

We now added a graphical user interface, so you don't have to go digging through our trash heap that we call code! The GUI works pretty well, but we have not tested it extensively. If the program throws an error, something catastrphic probably happened, so please let us know if that occurs. Other than that, the GUI will hopefully allow you to play with the LaMSA model even if you are not familiar with MATLAB. If you find an bug in the GUI or something else I messed up, please email me at kpandhigunta@hmc.edu. Have fun!

-Kaanthi Pandhigunta '23


### /components-library
The /components-library directory stores several structs used to call solve_model. In this directory, there are the subdirectories of /springs, /motors, /load-masses, and /latches. Within these subdirectories are structs for varying types of each of these parameters, such as specific latch shapes, varying motor and spring types, as well as a basic one for the load mass. These structs are then called in whatever specified combination in solve_model and heatmap_demo. In heatmap_demo there already exists code for each of these structs that can be commented out or commented back in to account for the various scenarios.

### How to Call the Model
The main function to run one simulation is solve_model.m, which has the following argument syntax:

``` matlab
[sol,transition_times]=solve_model(loading_motor,unlatching_motor,load,latch,spring, outputDirectory)
```

##### Input

Name	           |         Type          | Description
---------------- | --------------------- | -----------------
loading_motor	   | struct with 5 fields	 | Loading motor Parameters
unlatching_motor | struct with 5 fields  | Unlatching motor Parameters
load             | struct with 1 field	 | Load mass
latch            | struct with 5 fields	 | Latch Parameters
spring           | struct with 2 fields  | mass and force function of spring
outputDirectory  |         string        | Name of the output subdirectory <br> to export to or create

##### Output

Name              |	Type      |	Description
---------------   | --------  | -------------------
transition_times	|  1x2	    | Unlatching and launch times
sol	              |  manyx11  | t, y, ydot, x, xdot, <br> normal and frictional components, <br> spring force, and unlatching force <br> column vectors

### Output Files
Currently, solve_model will create two output files every time it is run. One is a .json file that contains the parameters used for this specific call as well as the transition_times. It also outputs a .csv file with all of the data found in sol. Both of these files can be found in the outputDirectory specified in the call, and both the file names and the outputDirectory are organized with a timestamp. However, when heatmap_demo is run, a single output directory is created at the time heatmap_demo is called, and then all of the output from the looping solve_model calls are stored in this directory.

##### Model Structure
The main function solve_model is generally structured as follows
+ Loading: use a root-finding function to determine where the total force on the load during loading is 0. This can be tricky, and often throws errors
+ Unlatching
  + Create an anonymous function wrapping unlatching_ode.m into a function that only takes time and state variables (position, velocity)
  + Perform a similar step for unlatching_ode.m
  + Set up the ODE solver to stop running when the value of unlatching_end changes sign (when the normal force becomes less than zero)
  + Using ode45, solve the unlatching ODE
  + The unlatching ODE is for the horizontal position of the latch, so use y_L to convert from x to y.
+ Launch
  + Essentially the same as loading, but using launching_ode.m and launching_end.m
+ Concatenate the solution arrays into one long one
+ Write output files using writeInfoToFile.m
  + Create a .json parameter file and .csv output file to be stored in outputDirectory

##### Graphical User Interface
Simply double click the file plot_app.mlapp located in the \app folder to access the app, or open the file in MATLAB App Designer and click Run. Some good starting values are already filled in. Just click the Graph! button, and you will see some plots. If you want to do some more customization, follow these steps.

Step 1: Choose your components. There is only 1 type of load and 1 type of latch. There are 3 types of springs, and 2 types of motors. Select the tab with your preferred type of spring, and your preferred motor for both the loading and unlatching motor.

Step 2: There are clearly marked required and optional fields for each component. You must fill in the required fields. The optional fields already have the recommended default values filled in.

Step 3: Select the two independent variables you want to vary over in the Graphing Corner. Fill in the range that you want to vary over for each variable. Pick the resolution that you want your plots in. Keep in mind that the higher the resolution, the longer it takes for the program to run.

Step 4: Hit Graph! and enjoy your plots.

Commit message:

README improvements
added descriptions of the columns of sol

gave better descriptions to input structs

slightly more detail regarding output files

README.md, after:

# MATLAB LaMSA Model

LaMSA model implemented in MATLAB. 

**Open app/plot_app.mlapp in MATLAB for a graphical user interface to run the model.**


## Code details

get_metrics.m is a helper function to extract kinematic metrics (e.g. vmax, amax) from the solution (t,x,v)


Code to numerically integrate LaMSA model is primarily in function solve_model.m

Helper functions to solve_model.m:
launching_ode.m
launching_end.m
unlatching_ode.
unlatching_end.m
writeInfoToFile.m
/components-library


Message from Andres Cook:

Congratulations, LaMSA person! You’ve volunteered for the coolest PoSM lab project. Of course, you’re probably just here because something stopped working, which is probably because of something I did, so…. Oops. Hopefully this documentation will at least be a good starting point, but if not, flag down Prof. Ilton and/or email me at acook@hmc.edu (or Facebook message me tbh)

-Andres Cook ‘21

P.S. from Jackson Castro:

We've added some new features! As well as a ton of more ouputs to sol, we have also incorporated friction and reorganized a lot of stuff in the new /components-library. Further updates to this directory will allow for even easier calls to different types of system setups. As of this moment in time, the simulation seems to be working pretty well, but if for some reason something is giving an odd output, feel free to contact me at jcastro@g.hmc.edu or on Facebook messenger. Best of luck with the simulations!

-Jackson Castro '22

P.P.S from Kaanthi Pandhigunta

We now added a graphical user interface, so you don't have to go digging through our trash heap that we call code! The GUI works pretty well, but we have not tested it extensively. If the program throws an error, something catastrphic probably happened, so please let us know if that occurs. Other than that, the GUI will hopefully allow you to play with the LaMSA model even if you are not familiar with MATLAB. If you find an bug in the GUI or something else I messed up, please email me at kpandhigunta@hmc.edu. Have fun!

-Kaanthi Pandhigunta '23


### /components-library
The /components-library directory stores several structs used to call solve_model. In this directory, there are the subdirectories of /springs, /motors, /load-masses, and /latches. Within these subdirectories are structs for varying types of each of these parameters, such as specific latch shapes, varying motor and spring types, as well as a basic one for the load mass. These structs are then called in whatever specified combination in solve_model and heatmap_demo. In heatmap_demo there already exists code for each of these structs that can be commented out or commented back in to account for the various scenarios.

### How to Call the Model
The main function to run one simulation is solve_model.m, which has the following argument syntax:

``` matlab
[sol,transition_times]=solve_model(loading_motor,unlatching_motor,load,latch,spring, outputDirectory)
```

##### Input

Name	           |         Type          | Description
---------------- | --------------------- | -----------------
loading_motor	   | struct with 4 fields	 | Motor that compresses spring, thereby 'loading' the LaMSA system.
unlatching_motor | struct with 4 fields  | Motor that pulls the latch out of the way, allowing the LaMSA system to launch.
load             | struct with 2 field	 | The thing that gets launched
latch            | struct with 7 fields	 | The object that sits above the load, preventing the spring from pushing the load up, until it is pulled out of the way. 
spring           | struct with 4 fields  | The spring that pushes the load up (can be non-linear)
outputDirectory  |         string        | Name of the output subdirectory <br> to export to or create

##### Output

Name              |	Type      |	Description
---------------   | --------  | -------------------
transition_times	|  1x2	    | Unlatching and launch times
sol	              |  manyx11  | t, y, ydot, x, xdot, <br> normal force on latch x, normal force on load y, <br> friction force on latch x, friction force on load y <br> spring force, and unlatching motor force

As indicated above, sol is a matrix with 11 columns and many rows - each row represents the state of the system at a given moment in time, and each column represents one quantity as a function of time.

Note that this code keeps track of the position, velocities, and forces on TWO objects as a function of time: the **load** being launched, and the **latch** being pulled away.

ALSO NOTE we only keep track of the motion of the **latch** in the x-direction, and the motion of the **load** in the y-direction. This is because we have set up our problem such that the latch only moves in the x direction, and the load only moves in the y-direction. A consequence of this is that 'y' forces in the 'sol' refer to forces acting on the load, and 'x' forces in the 'sol' refer to forces acting on the latch. 

+ The 't' column is the series of timesteps that the numerical solver computes the LaMSA system dynamics at.
+ The 'y' column is the y coordinate of the **load** as a function of time. 
+ The 'ydot' column is the vertical velocity of the **load** as a function of time. (derivative of y w.r.t time)
+ The 'x' column is the x coordinate of the **latch** as a function of time. 
+ The 'xdot' coulmn is the horizontal velocity of the **latch** as a function of time. (derivative of x w.r.t time)
+ The 'normal force on latch x' is the force in the x-direction exerted on the latch by the load. 
+ The 'normal force on load y' is the force in the y-direction exerted on the load by the latch. 
+ The 'friction force on latch x' is the force in the x-direction exerted on the latch by the load. 
+ The 'friction force on load y' is the force in the y-direction exerted on the load by the latch. 
+ The 'spring force' is the force that the spring exerts on the load as it pushes the load upwards. (y direction)
+ The 'unlatching motor force' is the force that the unlatching motor exerts on the latch as it pulls the latch out of the way, horizontally. (x direction)

### Output Files
Currently, solve_model will create two output files every time it is run. One is a .json file that contains the parameters used for this specific call as well as the transition_times. It also outputs a .csv file with all of the data found in sol. Both of these files can be found in the outputDirectory specified in the call, and both the file names and the outputDirectory are organized with a timestamp. However, when heatmap_demo is run, a single output directory is created at the time heatmap_demo is called, and then all of the output from the looping solve_model calls are stored in this directory.

##### Model Structure
The main function solve_model is generally structured as follows
+ Loading: use a root-finding function to determine where the total force on the load during loading is 0. This can be tricky, and often throws errors
+ Unlatching
  + Create an anonymous function wrapping unlatching_ode.m into a function that only takes time and state variables (position, velocity)
  + Perform a similar step for unlatching_ode.m
  + Set up the ODE solver to stop running when the value of unlatching_end changes sign (when the normal force becomes less than zero)
  + Using ode45, solve the unlatching ODE
  + The unlatching ODE is for the horizontal position of the latch, so use y_L to convert from x to y.
+ Launch
  + Essentially the same as loading, but using launching_ode.m and launching_end.m
+ Concatenate the solution arrays into one long one
+ Write output files using writeInfoToFile.m
  + Create a .json parameter file and .csv output file to be stored in outputDirectory. The .json file is a structured way of saving the parameters used when solve_model was called. The .csv output file actually stores all the numerical solution information (the various quantities as a function of time.)

##### Graphical User Interface
Simply double click the file plot_app.mlapp located in the \app folder to access the app, or open the file in MATLAB App Designer and click Run. Some good starting values are already filled in. Just click the Graph! button, and you will see some plots. If you want to do some more customization, follow these steps.

Step 1: Choose your components. There is only 1 type of load and 1 type of latch. There are 3 types of springs, and 2 types of motors. Select the tab with your preferred type of spring, and your preferred motor for both the loading and unlatching motor.

Step 2: There are clearly marked required and optional fields for each component. You must fill in the required fields. The optional fields already have the recommended default values filled in.

Step 3: Select the two independent variables you want to vary over in the Graphing Corner. Fill in the range that you want to vary over for each variable. Pick the resolution that you want your plots in. Keep in mind that the higher the resolution, the longer it takes for the program to run.

Step 4: Hit Graph! and enjoy your plots.
